HONG KONG When President Jiang Zemin of China leaves here on Thursday after celebrating the first anniversary of Hong Kong's handover, he will be the first passenger to take off from the new $20 billion Hong Kong International Airport. Unfortunately for Hong Kong, there will be nowhere near as many people following him as originally planned.
The airport, the last and grandest monument here to British colonial rule, was pushed through at a time when Asia was riding high. Second in cost only to Kansai International Airport in Osaka, Japan, it also includes beyond its two runways and a 45-acre terminal building that is the world's largest a vast network of highways, bridges, tunnels and railways to transport people the 21 miles into town.
For several years, the airport project was the world's largest, employing 20,000 laborers and more than half the world's dredging fleet to create a man-made island in the waters off Hong Kong.
"They built this airport at the wrong time," said Jim Eckes, an aviation consultant at Indoswiss Ltd. in Hong Kong. "It should have been built when Hong Kong's economy was suffering and opened when it was strong."
Predicting economic cycles is a fool's game, of course. And in the fullness of time, Hong Kong's airport may come to be seen as a wise investment in the future. But for now, it is coinciding with a bust in air travel. The number of tourists visiting Hong Kong fell 24 percent in the first quarter, and the airport seems likely to fall far short of its capacity of 35 million passengers a year.
Hong Kong is only one of several Asian cities that are investing heavily in new airports. Malaysia opened its $2.5 billion Kuala Lumpur International Airport on Tuesday. Over the next six years, Seoul, and Guangzhou in China, plan to open huge new airports, while Singapore, Taipei and Manila are adding terminals to their existing airfields. Bangkok may also build a new airport.
The trouble is, overall passenger traffic declined in Thailand and Korea in 1997, while it slowed dramatically in Hong Kong and Singapore. The International Air Transport Association, in a highly unusual move, slashed its five-year forecast of the annual growth in traffic for the region to 3.7 percent from 7.7 percent. As with so many other industries here, Asia's airports are entering an era of potentially severe overcapacity.
"This really couldn't be happening at a worse time, but that's the breaks," said Tony Tyler, director of corporate development at Cathay Pacific Airlines, the flagship carrier at Hong Kong's airport, which has invested $1 billion in a new headquarters, staff hotel and flight-training center.
While airport planners in Kuala Lumpur and Hong Kong insist that their projects will pay off in coming decades, they acknowledge they will fall well short of their passenger targets for the first few years. And that will put a pinch on everyone from the airlines, freight carriers and shop owners to the governments, which took on billions in debt to pay for the projects.
The Malaysian government will have to stretch out the repayment of loans to banks, according to Clifford Herbert, the executive chairman of the Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Analysts said Hong Kong's Airport Authority should have no trouble repaying its first set of bank loans, which come due in 2001. But the steep cost of the project has forced the airport to demand high prices for everything from the landing fees it charges to the rent for duty-free shops.
"It is certainly the most expensive airport I'm aware of in Asia and it is more expensive than any airport in Europe," said Ross Allen, the operations director of DHL Worldwide Express in Hong Kong.
Airports are potent symbols of civic pride, and Hong Kong and Kuala Lumpur spared no expense to create glittering gateways. Though brand new, these projects are symbols of an era in which Asia's economic growth and the ambitions of its political leaders knew no bounds.
On a lush site 45 miles from Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian government built a futuristic terminal with sweeping glass walls and an atrium with a tropical rain forest. It also installed a modern computer system that integrates every function of the airport, from baggage carousels to elevators. With the capacity to handle 25 million passengers a year, the new airport is palatial compared to the cramped, somewhat shabby quarters of its predecessor, which will remain in only limited service.
Herbert believes Malaysia, which began planning the airport in 1992, will eventually use every inch of the new facility. But he conceded that "if the recession had set in," when the airport was being planned, "we would have had to scale it down, and the architecture would have been different."
Kenneth Brown, the president of GE Southeast Asia in Singapore, defended the airport's size, noting, "Asia has always been chasing the curve in terms of infrastructure. Building this airport ahead of demand is not a bad idea."
Still, experts said Kuala Lumpur's airport had a glaring weakness in that it opened without a high-speed rail link to the city. That could mean two-hour trips to Kuala Lumpur on traffic-clogged roads. The train will not be ready for two years, and the government will not allow municipal taxis to take passengers into the city because it has signed a contract with an airport taxi service.
Hong Kong's new airport, complete with railway, was conceived by the British government in 1989 as a statement of confidence in Hong Kong's future after the Tiananmen Square massacre. Britain chose a site off Lantau Island, west of Hong Kong. That required chopping the hills off two small islands and filling in the water between them to create a giant platform.
As Phillip Bruce, a spokesman for the Airport Authority, likes to put it, "We built something the size of Heathrow out of the sea."
nn
Rearranging the topography was expensive: Bruce said the airport itself cost $6.3 billion, while the roads, bridges and tunnels cost another $13.7 billion. As an airport alone, Kansai was more expensive, at $14 billion. Most analysts treat Hong Kong's related projects as part of the airport.
The epic scale of the airport caused a rift between the British and the Chinese, who were already feuding over the terms of the handover. China accused Britain of depleting Hong Kong's reserves to build a project that enriched British design and engineering firms. When the invitations went out for Thursday's dedication ceremony, Hong Kong's last British governor, Chris Patten, was left off the list as he was for other anniversary events even though he had championed the project.
Like any huge investment in infrastructure, the airport pumped money into Hong Kong's economy. But Ian Perkin, the chief economist at the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, said Hong Kong's economy would have run full tilt with or without the project. In fact, he said the airport may have squeezed out some private-sector development because so much of Hong Kong's construction resources were being soaked up by the project.
Today, Hong Kong could use an economic jolt. But most of the main spending is finished. The man-made island has room for a satellite terminal, which would expand capacity to 87 million passengers a year from 35 million. But given that the airport will be lucky to draw the 29 million people that passed through close-in Kai Tak Airport last year, Hong Kong is unlikely to break ground soon.
These days, people involved in the project find themselves on the defensive. Sir Norman Foster, the renowned British architect who designed the terminal, said the building, which has an undulating roof-line and swooping wings that resemble a giant pterodactyl, came in on budget. It was even cheaper per square foot than other terminals, he said, because it used prefabricated materials.
Sir Norman said he was frustrated that economic concerns were overshadowing what he called an extraordinary engineering achievement.
When money begins flowing again here, Hong Kong International will scoop up as much of it as it can. The terminal has a vast shopping center, called Sky Mart, with 143 stores, including a Chinese tea shop and an Irish bar. Clinton Leeks, the corporate development director, said the airport hoped to generate 63 percent of its revenue from nonairline activities an unusually high percentage for an airport outside the United States.
The airport's large hotel and shopping mall also gives it the chance to serve as a regional hub within Asia so that, say, a passenger traveling from Bangkok to New York could change planes in Hong Kong. The hub market has been dominated by Singapore's Changi Airport, which has amenities such as a hotel within the terminal complex. But Hong Kong is better situated geographically than Singapore, since it can be reached from most European and North American cities with a nonstop flight.
Hong Kong, though, may be in danger of pricing itself out of the market. Landing fees, depending on the size of the plane, will be anywhere from 20 percent to 60 percent higher than at Kai Tak, which will be shut down this weekend when the new airport opens for normal traffic. The one-time fee to land a 747 is set at more than $3,000. And since Cathay Pacific uses a lot of 747s, Tyler said it would be unprofitable to add many extra flights unless the fees come down.
Leeks said the airport would re-evaluate its landing fees after a year. But it is holding the line against retailers, who have tried to renegotiate rich multiyear leases now that it is clear that traffic will fall far short of the forecasts.
With the spate of new airports in the region, Asia may soon see a dogfight between airports not unlike that waged between airlines. Kuala Lumpur has set its landing fees below those of neighboring Singapore. And in a direct challenge to Hong Kong, the nearby Portuguese colony of Macao cut fees in half for late evening flights at its new airport.
The battle for passengers in southern China will only intensify further when Guangzhou, which operates the third-busiest airport in China, opens a new field sometime after 2001.
"I would view this as the first step in severe airport competition in this region," Eckes of Indoswiss said.
If only people would start flying again.